In this video we'll learn how to access the address or location in memory of any variable.
We'll also learn how to initialize a pointer variable to point to another variable in C++.
We can use the address operator which is the ampersand symbol to the left side of an operand the address
operator is an operator and when used in an expression it evaluates to the address of its operand.
Of course the operand must have an l value so it can't be a constant or an expression that evaluates
to a temporary values in the example code.
We have a variable name which is a simple integer variable that's been initialized to 10.
If we display them we're displaying the contents of none which is 10.
If we display the size of num then we're displaying how much storage is allocated by them.
In other words how much storage do we need on my machine to store an integer.
In this case it's 4 bytes.
Finally if we display the address of Naam using the address operator we get a hexadecimal number that
represents the location in memory of the variable name a hexadecimal number is just a base 16 number.
So far so good.
You can see that the address operator evaluates to exactly what we expect the address of the variable
name.
Now let's see these same statements with pointer variables in the first line we declare P to be a pointer
to an integer variable.
So that means that P can hold values that are addresses of integers.
Also notice that we didn't initialize the pointer p in the first output statement we're displaying the
value of p the value of p is the value that stored in P.
Since we didn't initialize P We have garbage data in P and you can see that address displayed in the
second output statement we're displaying the address of the variable P.
Since we're using the address operator and in the third statement we display the size of P using the
size of operator on my machine.
This displays a 4.
Which means that P is 4 bytes of storage since P holds addresses.
This also means that addresses on my machine can be stored in four bytes on the next line.
We assign no pointer to P.
This sets PITA's zero which means it's pointing nowhere.
Since p is a variable we can change its value.
This seems obvious but it's important since when we talk about references in a bit you'll see that you
can't change a reference once it's initialized.
Finally in the last update statement we display the value of p again and this time we get 0 because
we zeroed it out.
I know these examples seem pretty simple but please try them out on your machine and be sure you understand
these fundamental concepts.
Since everything else builds on them here you can see that I'm defining 5 pointer variables p 1 through
p. 5 and initialize them all to NULL pointer each pointer variable points to a different type.
So each can hold addresses of variables of the type they point to.
If we display the size of each of these pointer variables What do you think will display with the size
of P1 be less than the size of P4 because P1 points to an int and P for to vector objects.
If you set four for each pointer you'd be right.
Based on the previous example all pointers in my program will hold values that can be represented in
4 bytes an address of an integer and an address of a vector and the address of a string all have size
of four on my machine.
There is a big difference between the size of the pointer variable itself and the size of what it points
to.
Again take your time and make sure you understand the difference between a pointer and what it points
It's very common to think of a pointer as what it points to and that's a mistake.
A pointer is just a simple variable.
What it points to could be simple or a very complex structure.
When we declare pointers as we've done so far there are typed pointers.
This means that we explicitly declare the pointer variable to point to a variable of a specific type.
In this example we're declaring an integer score and initializing it to 10 in a double high temp and
initializing it to 100 point seven then we declare score pointer as a pointer to an integer so far so
good.
Now we assign the address of score to score pointer.
The compiler is fine with that since score pointer holds addresses of integers and scores an integer.
But look at the last assignment statement.
In this case we're assigning the address of high temp to score pointer.
The compiler won't let you do this.
You'll get a compiler error.
You told the compiler that score pointer holds addresses of integers but you're asking it to store the
address of a double both addresses are 4 bytes long so the issue isn't that size won't fit.
The issue is that there's a type conflict in C++.
We can also have untyped void pointers.
I'm not going to talk about those but they aren't used that much in C plus plus they're more used in
C great so let's review a very simple concept but a very important concept.
Pointers are variables so they can change.
Pointers can be know and pointers can be uninitialized.
That's not usually a good idea but it can happen.
The example code shows all these options.
First we declared two double variables high and low temp and we initialize them.
Then we declared temp pointer as a pointer to a double and we don't initialize it so it's pointing anywhere
then we assign the address of high temp to 10 pointer and then we change 10 pointer to point somewhere
else by assigning the address of low temp.
Finally we no out 10 pointer by assigning null pointer We'll come back to these pointer properties later
when we compare pointers and references and we'll go over some guidelines as when to use pointers versus
reference.
Let's head over to the idea now and go over these examples in life code and then in the next video we'll
learn how to follow appointer and get to the data that it's pointing to.
OK so I mean the code like idea and I in the section 12 workspace in these simple pointers project in
this project we're just going to go over some real simple examples of declaring pointers looking at
the size of pointers looking at addresses just so you get a really good feel of what's going on here.
First thing you'll notice here is that we are declaring numb to be an integer and we're initialized
to 10.
That's just a plain old integer variable there's no pointer involved here at all.
So in this case I've got a variable.
It's called numb and it exists somewhere in memory.
Let's say it's somewhere in memory here.
Obviously that memory has to have a location.
Right we need an address.
So let's just say that the address is a thousand pages a thousand and these examples obviously it won't
be a thousand when we display it but it's easier to understand this way.
So right now it's got a 10 in it because we've initialized it so that's the value of arm is 10.
So in this case here I print out the value of numb is numb which will display a 10.
Then I'll ask what's the size of number.
What is the size of an integer.
On my machine this may be different on your machine but on my machine an integer is 4 bytes and that
at the end here will say what is the address of GNOME and this is where the address operator comes in
that ampersand right before the variable name.
This evaluates to the location in memory or the address of that variable.
In this case it will be thousands who would print the thousand but obviously it won't print something
different.
When I actually run the program.
So let's take a look at the output from here.
OK so here's the output I'll just put this side by side so we can read it.
The value of number is 10.
That's exactly what we expected.
And I knew that the size of an integer on my machine is four years it might be eight.
It might be four.
And then the address of Nahm is a hexadecimal number.
So this is the way that addresses are represented in C++ a hex number is just a number to base 16.
So that's the address of that integer variable.
Ok so hopefully this makes sense.
This is the real foundation to understanding pointers and understanding locations or addresses of variables
so hopefully this makes sense.
So let me clear this out and then let's do this next example here.
Here's where we're actually declaring a pointer and we're doing that right here on line 17.
We're declaring P to be a pointer to an integer remember.
You read these from right to left so p is a pointer to an integer.
What is P.
It's a variable.
So here's p.
It's got storage associated with it and it's got a location associated with it.
Let's say that the address of P is 2000 this time what's in P right now.
I never initialized it so there's garbage in here.
There's a random bit pattern here.
And as far as C++ is concerned that random bit pattern is an address right because pointers hold addresses
so this guy right now is pointing somewhere who knows where but it's definitely pointing somewhere.
So what's the value of p whatever that that pattern is.
We're going to get garbage right here.
And you can see that the trouble or the danger of following that pointer and putting something in this
address here that could be something pretty important on your machine and you just wiped it out.
Hopefully you'll get a crash and you can fix it.
OK.
So what's the address.
Well the address happy is the location where this pointer is stored in this case 2000.
And then what's the size of P.
How big or how much storage do I need to represent a point on my machine while on my machine it happens
to be 4 bytes.
Again yours it could be different.
So this will print out some garbage memory address then it'll print out the address where this variable
is stored and then it should print out of 4.
So let's give it a shot.
And here you go.
Move it up here as well.
The value of p is there is the hex address.
That's the garbage address and the address AP is at this location right here.
And again 18 and the size of P is for now unblind 22.
I no doubt the pointer I said P equals null pointer null pointer is basically address's 0 surges that
you're throwing out the pointer.
So if I print out now the value of p I should get back to 0 and I do what we're doing here is we're
making this point to point nowhere which is real real important.
OK so let's do a few more examples.
In this case I'm declaring five pointers 1 through P5.
Just like I did in the slides and all of these pointers are pointing to different types.
OK so.
And they're all no doubt right now.
So in the case of P1 P1 has stored in memory obviously right we need to allocate storage for that variable.
Right now it's not.
So it's basically pointing nowhere P2 is also a pointer and reallocating space for it.
It's pointing nowhere.
Eventually one will point to an integer P2 a point to a double P3 will point to unsigned long long and
the form a vector and P 5 to a string.
So what they're pointing to is very different from what they are.
They're just pointer variables real primitive types.
In this case what does the size of P1.
How much storage do I need to represent the address of an integer.
It turns out it's 4 bytes.
What's the size of P2.
How much storage do I need to represent the address of a double.
Again it's four bytes on my machine four bytes and I can represent any address of any variable.
So what you expect here is to print for all the way down.
Now this is important it is really important to understand the difference between the POINAR and what
is pointing to.
Let's say we've got P What eventually p 1 is going to point to an integer right.
That's the whole idea.
And P2 will point to a double.
So we'll have much more storage here.
And let's say for is over here P4 will eventually point to a vector or string object so it could be
pointing to a vector of string objects where this could be Larry Moe and Curly.
Where these guys are all string objects so you can see the pointer itself is simple.
The pointer itself is simple the pointer itself is simple they're all really simple.
What they point to could be very simple or could be pretty complex as you see right here.
So make sure you understand the difference between the pointer and what it points to.
It's really critical.
So in this example if I run it I expect to get four straight down line and there you go size of the
one is for all the way down the line because all I need is for bytes to represent any address on my
machine.
Again this is very machine specific.
You might have eight on your machine.
Ok so now let's go through one more little example here.
All right so let's walk through this before we even run it.
In this case what have I got I've got to score as an integer and I'm initializing it to 10.
OK let's do that over here.
Here score.
It's an integer.
And I put a 10 in there.
Let's assume that that address is 1000.
That's where score lives.
Again it will be different on your machine for sure.
I'm just making that up.
Then I've got a double called high temperature.
Obviously I need more storage for doubles right.
And this is called high temp and right now I have a hundred point seven in there and let's say that
this is and address 2000.
And so those are the addresses for those variables.
Now here's my pointer.
It's called Score pointer.
It's got storage associated with it right now.
I've nailed it out.
So it's pointing nowhere so far so good.
Now this is what I'm doing here I'm saying score pointer is equal to the address of score I'm initializing
that pointer to a point somewhere.
Now what's the address of score.
It's right here.
Thousand.
So I'm going to put a thousand in here.
I'm not putting the 10 in here and putting the thousand in here.
That's my pointer.
So now score pointer is pointing to an integer because it holds the address of an integer.
So score pointer is pointing to score.
That's what we're doing right here.
So now let's display what's the value of score well the value score is 10.
Right right here.
So they should display a 10.
What's the address of score in this example it's a thousand.
And what's the value of the score pointer a thousand.
And so when we run this now we're definitely going to get a 10 here and we're going to get obviously
not a thousand here.
But what's important is that those two numbers will be the same.
They have to be the same because score pointers pointing to score and score has an address which is
the one that's in score pointer.
OK.
So when we run this we're expecting as I said a 10 and then two memory addresses that are the same.
So let's give that a try.
And this is where the value of score is 10 and then the address of score is you see here and the NF
0 values score pointer 0.
So these are the exact same address which is exactly what we expected.
And then this last little of compiler error here let me show you that so that you can see the compiler
and what it looks like in case you run into it.
This is a pretty common mistake.
Actually what happens here is we're saying score pointer right here and points to an integer right and
holds addresses of integers.
But we're trying to put in here the address of high temp high temp is a double the compiler's going
to say sorry I don't know what you're talking about.
You're telling me that score pointer holds addresses of integers but now you're trying to put the address
of a double in there.
I can't do that.
And let's compile this.
You can see what the air looks like and it makes it make sense right.
It says I cannot converted a pointer to a double to a pointer to an integer.
OK so that gives you some insight.
Play around with these examples create some of your own.
Walk through them draw like I did.
So you really understand these connections between the pointer variable and what it points to.